paper_excerpt = """
Transformer models have fundamentally changed the landscape of natural language processing 
since their introduction in the seminal 2017 paper "Attention Is All You Need" by Vaswani 
et al. Unlike recurrent neural networks, which process tokens sequentially, transformers 
process entire sequences in parallel using a mechanism called self-attention. This allows 
the model to weigh the relevance of each token relative to every other token in the sequence, 
capturing long-range dependencies that RNNs struggled with.

The core innovation of the transformer is the multi-head attention mechanism. Rather than 
computing a single attention distribution, multi-head attention runs several attention 
operations in parallel, each learning to focus on different aspects of the input — some 
heads may attend to syntactic relationships, others to semantic ones. The outputs of these 
heads are concatenated and projected into the final representation.

Positional encoding is another critical component. Since transformers process tokens in 
parallel rather than sequentially, they have no inherent sense of token order. Positional 
encodings — either fixed sinusoidal functions or learned embeddings — are added to the 
input representations to inject order information.

The transformer architecture has since spawned two dominant paradigms: encoder-only models 
like BERT, which excel at understanding tasks such as classification and named entity 
recognition; and decoder-only models like GPT, which are optimized for generation tasks. 
Encoder-decoder models like the original transformer and T5 bridge both, handling tasks 
that require reading input and producing output, such as translation and summarization.

Training these models at scale revealed the phenomenon of emergent capabilities — behaviors 
that appear suddenly at certain parameter thresholds and were not present in smaller versions 
of the same architecture. This has driven a race toward ever-larger models, raising important 
questions about computational cost, environmental impact, and the accessibility of frontier 
AI research.
"""